# Aula III 


## Tecnologia Computacional

| Dispositivo | Descrição |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| Dispositivos móveis pessoais | Consumo de energia eficiente e tempo real |
| Desktops  | Relação preço/performance | 
| Servidores | Disponibilidade, escabilidade e vazão (troughput)|
| Clusters / Datacenters / Cloud | SaaS, Disponibilidade, Preço/Performance, Sub-classe: supercomputadores, performance de ponto flutuante |
| Computadores embarcados | Preço |
 
> Top500.org - Top máquinas mais poderosas?

## Market-based content

- Sos, system on a chip
- Software as a Service 
- Platform as a Service 
- Infraestructure as a Service

# Tecnologia Computacional, limitações 

# Thermal Dissipation 
- Limitation of technology advancements due to the power wall
- Generates more heat than sillicon can dissipate
- Thermal dissipation power

# Paralelismo
- Pipeline, dividir em etapas (Reforçar esse tópico, adicionar detalhes, explicar de forma simples) 

-> Computers haven't seen much change ever since 2010 and 2005.

# Memory Wall
- The band length between memory and processor tmust be smaller due to AI challenges 
- Processors are more efficient then the amount of data that processors can be given 
- HBM, High Band Memory 
- What technologies have come out in order to solve this problem? Tell me. 
- What do video cards have to do with it?

# DRAM 
- The time of memory access does not depend on where it is located
- Random access memory
- DRAM -> Dynamic Random Memory Access. If SRAM, it's static.
- Latency does not seem to be improving despite capacity increase. Explain why.
- Inserir pinos tem suas limitações.

-> Talk about how other computer parts are increasing over time and mention percentages

# Técnicas de redução de potencia dinamica
- Clock gating
- DVFS
- Overclocking (ARM Big Little)
- Cores mistos

